Problems of Architecture
During the same time that Gordon Matta-Clark cuts open the facade of the house near the Niagara Falls in 1974 (Bingo), Kurt cuts open the house in Wangelen. Not to transform it into a piece of art. But simply to expand its volume. For that, he opens up the large tent roof of the Bernese farmhouse. Which is kind of the facade of the building. In these traditional houses, the roof reaches almost to the ground floor. It’s due to the construction tecnique and avaiable material in this region 400 years go. To him, the house is not an art project. It’s only the shell for his works. “Atelier” he calls it. But soon it would be renamed “Begegnungsort”, “Aktionsraum”, or simply “Werkstatt Wangelen”. Because he’s realizing that the house has the potential to become more than an atelier. People like to spend time there. And something is happening to them during a visit.

They become creators themselves. “After one or two days post-arrival, people were in their own field of creativity. The place changed them. Almost all would find a task and develop a feeling for their position in the group. ” This makes me think of Beuy’s term “Soziale Plastik” and I wonder if there’s a connection. When talking about these references to Kurt today, he simply calls the artists “one-linear”. Whatever he means, he seems to not be fond of them. As if there’s no one who’s “multilinear” except Kurt himself. And Henri Matisse, maybe. I guess it’s good to have a certain amount of confidence as an artist.

So Kurt started to examine the behavior of the people who visited. He calls it research, and himself a behavioral researcher. That was the foundation of his architectural intervention. One of the first acts, after cleaning out the old farm house for many weeks with his children, was to put up a shelter roof at an 110-degree angle to the old structure. “To make actions possible, I needed a large room,” says Kurt. “People need small and narrow rooms, like biological cells. To retreat and have privacy. But they need large and open rooms where they could enfold and work together as a group, too.” That is easy to understand as an architect. It’s what one learns about spaces and rooms and how they influence the feelings and actions of human beings. But never would I’ve imagined it like this house in Wangelen. I’m used to clean, smooth, and finished architecture. Architecture, representing completeness and resistance. Permanence and stability. Which client would want an incomplete project that promises flexibility related to changes in personal needs instead? One of the most common description of Wangelen I get in conversations with people who saw it is: “unfinished” or, less nicely, “infinite construction site.”

So why is it that, at the end of my architectural education, I’m at a point where I decide to do my free diploma about a house like this one? I came across the topic of Werkstatt Wangelen in an articel quite early in my studies. My mother gave it to me. I was astonished and found it interesting, but I did not know what to do with it. Not thinking it would be relevant. The house and the way my grandfather built it did not reflect what I was learning at school: Find a concept. Be site-specific. Be able to explain every line you draw. Come up with answers to a problem. During my research, I came across this sentence from Gordon Matta-Clark:

“I don’t think (architects) practitioners are solving anything except how to make a living.”

Was I lying to myself when I thought architecture could solve problems? Can architecture solve the problem of an unhappy marriage? Can it solve the annoying problem that it produces too much CO2? Can it solve the wealth gap in society? Can it stop gentrification? Can it solve the problem that my new neighbors in the newly built mega-ugly, full-concrete, multi-apartment house behind ours see into my window when I’m sitting on the toilet? At one point in my education, I had not only the feeling it can, but that architecture must solve all the problems. That I must solve all the problems when I go out there. Out of the save womb called Hönggerberg. But when working in an office, it quickly becomes clear that the reality looks different. I feel like I was lied to. An office needs to survive by getting paid. And the way to get paid is to do tasks that are set by someone external. Not by solving all the problems. Or not the problems I thought I would solve. Maybe Gordon Matta-Clark was just honest when he said:

“Anarchitecture attempts to solve no problem.”

Is it a more sustainable attempt to make the world a better place if someone just buys an old house in decay and starts building for himself and the people that visit? Instead of trying to solve problems for the ones who can afford it? Easier said than done from today’s standpoint. The prices for decayed and abandoned houses have changed. But the attitude of Kurt seems interesting still. To build something without financial means or the expectation of financial wealth. To build outside the common system and order. Here I mean “order” in the way Georges Bataille and G.M.C. explain that:


“[...] [A]rchitecture is not the building but the system that produces a particular kind of building – the order imposed on buildings, not the buildings themselves.”


